## VS-SVM

**Improving measures of chemical structural similarity using machine learning on chemical-genetic interactions**

VS-SVM is a MATLAB script to be used for the purpose of predicting functional (chemical-genetic) similarities of compounds from their chemical structures using support vector machine learning models. Although we have used this script to predict the functional similarities of our RIKEN high-confidence set (Piotrowski et al., 2017) here, the script is scalable to any compound collection for which chemical-genetic interaction profiles exist. 

> Features

- The model uses pairwise structural similarities of compounds for prediction of their pairwise functional similarities.
- The model extracts supervised principal components from chemical-genetic interaction profiles (from the training data only) to be used as learning labels.
-	The model uses a number of bootstraps (200 bootstraps for our RIKEN high-confidence set) to predict pairwise functional similarities. Each bootstrap assigns ~0.632N unique compounds to the training set and the rest to the test set using uniformly random drawing with replacement, where N is the total number of compounds in the collection.
-	The model predicts the functional similarity of a pair of compounds by taking the mean of the predictions over all bootstraps where the two compounds are both in the test set.
-	Although the SVM model parameters in the script are optimized for our RIKEN high-confidence set, the optimal model parameters should be tuned to the compound collection if others are used.
-	The script is developed in the MATLAB environment with no other dependencies.

> Execution details

**/VS-SVM/CG_Gold/ASP-8:** This directory includes six matfiles and a subdirectory as follows:

-	`Artemisinins.mat:` forms a group of 20 compounds in the RIKEN high-confidence set with very similar chemical-genetic interaction profiles. We removed these compounds from our learning data collection to prevent any bias in our machine learning models.
-	`Profs_New.mat:` contains the chemical-genetic interaction data for our compounds in the RIKEN high-confidence set (826 compounds). 
-	`Frags_Ord.mat:` contains the ASP fingerprints (depth 8) for our compounds in the RIKEN high-confidence set ordered as they are listed in the Profs_New matfile. Frags_Ord_Spr matfile is the sparse form of the Frags_Ord matfile, where the many zeros of the ASP fingerprints are removed for the purposes of storage efficiency.
-	`Cpds_Prf_New.mat:` contains the chemical name of our compounds in the same order that their functional and structural data are stored in the Prof_New and Frags_Ord matfiles respectively.
-	`Cpds_Frg_Ord.mat:` contains the same data as the Cpds_Prf_New matfile.
-	`Clust_Frags_NoArtm:` contains structural clustering of our compounds in the RIKEN high-confidence set based on the ASP fingerprints using the K-medoids clustering algorithm (K=10).

**/VS-SVM/CG_Gold/Clust_Profs_NoArtm:** This directory contains functional clustering of our compounds in the RIKEN high-confidence set based on our chemical-genetic interaction data using the K-means clustering algorithm (K=10).

**/VS-SVM/Learning_Model:** This directory includes three matfiles and a log.txt file to store the experimental results of 200 bootstraps for our RIKEN high-confidence set. Please note that our machine learning model creates a single subdirectory for every bootstrap; however, we have not included those 200 bootstrap subdirectories for the sake of storage efficiency.

-	`Cpds_Trn_Tst.mat:` indicates whether a compound is in the training set or the test set in a bootstrap. This matfile also includes the number of supervised principal components that explain 95% of chemical-genetic interaction data (for the training set only) in a bootstrap to be used as learning labels.
-	`Prd_Bts.mat:` contains all the pairwise predictions of the test set for each bootstrap. Both compounds have to belong to the test set in order to have a valid prediction; otherwise, the invalid value of -10 is considered for all the compound pairs where at least one compound belongs to the training set. The compound pair indices are generated by the nchoosek MATLAB command.
-	`Prd_Avg.mat:` contains the final prediction for every compound pair by taking the mean over all the bootstrap prediction values where the test prediction values are valid.
-	`log.txt:` contains the step-by-step execution details of every bootstrap for our RIKEN high-confidence set.  

> Prediction for a new compound

The new compound should be added to the test set in all bootstraps. Thus, our machine learning model will compute the functional similarity of the new compound with all other compounds that are assigned to the test set in a bootstrap. The functional similarities of the new compound with other compounds in the collection are predicted as the mean of the functional similarities of the new compound over all bootstraps where the test prediction values are valid. Please note that the machine learning model for each bootstrap does not need to be recomputed in the presence of a new sample because the training set for each bootstrap does not change.

> Citation

Please cite the following article:

Hamid Safizadeh, Scott W. Simpkins, Justin Nelson, Sheena C. Li, Jeff S. Piotrowski, Mami Yoshimura, Yoko Yashiroda, Hiroyuki Hirano, Hiroyuki Osada, Minoru Yoshida, Charles Boone, Chad L. Myers, “Improving measures of chemical structural similarity using machine learning on chemical-genetic interactions”, preprint is available on BioRxiv.
